SPECIAL MESSAGE TO THE CONGRESS ON URGENT NATIONAL NEEDS

President John F. Kennedy, May 25, 1961

Finally, if we are to win the battle that is now going on around the
world between freedom and tyranny, the dramatic achievements in space
which occurred in recent weeks should have made clear to us all, as
did the Sputnik in 1957, the impact of this adventure on the minds of
men everywhere, who are attempting to make a determination of which
road they should take. Since early in my term, our efforts in space
have been under review. With the advice of the Vice President, who is
Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we are
strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may
not. Now it is time to take longer strides-time for a great new
American enterprise-time for this nation to take a clearly leading
role in space achievement, which in many ways may hold the key to our
future on earth.

I believe we possess all the resources and talents necessary. But the
facts of the matter are that we have never made the national decisions
or marshaled the national resources required for such leadership. We
have never specified long-range goals on an urgent time schedule, or
managed our resources and our time so as to insure their fulfillment.

Recognizing the head start obtained by the Soviets with their large
rocket engines, which gives them many months of lead-time, and
recognizing the likelihood that they will exploit this lead for some
time to come in still more impressive successes, we nevertheless are
required to make new efforts on our own. For while we cannot guarantee
that we shall one day be first, we can guarantee that any failure to
make this effort will make us last. We take an additional risk by
making it in full view of the world, but as shown by the feat of
astronaut Shepard, this very risk enhances our stature when we are
successful. But this is not merely a race. Space is open to us now;
and our eagerness to share its meaning is not governed by the efforts
of others. We go into space because whatever mankind must undertake,
free men must fully share.

I therefore ask the Congress, above and beyond the increases I have
earlier requested for space activities, to provide the funds which are
needed to meet the following national goals:

First, I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving
the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and
returning him safely to the earth. No single space project in this
period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the
long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or
expensive to accomplish. We propose to accelerate the development of
the appropriate lunar space craft. We propose to develop alternate
liquid and solid fuel boosters, much larger than any now being
developed, until certain which is superior.

We propose additional funds for other engine development and for
unmanned explorations -- explorations which are particularly important
for one purpose which this nation will never overlook: the survival of
the man who first makes this daring flight. But in a very real sense,
it will not be one man going to the moon-if we make this judgment
affirmatively, it will be an entire nation. For all of us must work to
put him there.

Secondly, an additional 23 million dollars, together with 7 million
dollars already available, will accelerate development of the Rover
nuclear rocket. This gives promise of some day providing a means for
even more exciting and ambitious exploration of space, perhaps beyond
the moon, perhaps to the very end of the solar system itself.

Third, an additional 50 million dollars will make the most of our
present leadership, by accelerating the use of space satellites for
world-wide communications.  Fourth, an additional 75 million
dollars-of which 53 million dollars is for the Weather Bureau-will
help give us at the earliest possible time a satellite system for
world-wide weather observation.

Let it be clear-and this is a judgment which the Members of the
Congress must finally make-let if be clear that I am asking the
Congress and the country to accept a firm commitment to a new course
of action-a course which will last for many years and carry very heavy
costs: 531 million dollars in fiscal '62 -- an estimated seven to nine
billion dollars additional over the next five years. If we are to go
only half way, or reduce our sights in the face of difficulty, in my
judgment it would be better not to go at all.

Now this is a choice which this country must make, and I am confident
that under the leadership of the Space Committees of the Congress, and
the Appropriating Committees, that you will consider the matter
carefully.

It is a most important decision that we make as a nation. But all of
you have lived through the last four years and have seen the
significance of space and the adventures in space, and no one can
predict with certainty what the ultimate meaning will be of mastery of
space.

I believe we should go to the moon. But I think every citizen of this
country as well as the Members of the Congress should consider the
matter carefully in making their judgment, to which we have given
attention over many weeks and months, because it is a heavy burden,
and there is no sense in agreeing or desiring that the United States
take an affirmative position in outer space, unless we are prepared to
do the work and bear the burdens to make it successful. If we are not,
we should decide today and this year.

This decision demands a major national commitment of scientific and
technical manpower, materiel and facilities, and the possibility of
their diversion from other important activities where they are already
thinly spread. It means a degree of dedication, organization and
discipline which have not always characterized our research and
development efforts. It means we cannot afford undue work stoppages,
inflated costs of material or talent, wasteful interagency rivalries,
or a high turnover of key personnel.

New objectives and new money cannot solve these problems. They could
in fact, aggravate them further-unless every scientist, every
engineer, every serviceman, every technician, contractor, and civil
servant gives his personal pledge that this nation will move forward,
with the full speed of freedom, in the exciting adventure of space.
