*John Kerry on Space 2004*

*Frank Sietzen Jr. and Keith L. Cowing
Monday, July 26, 2004

http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewnews.html?id=965

Excerpt from "New Moon Rising - The Making of America's New Space
Vision and the Remaking of NASA,"
by Frank Sietzen Jr. and Keith L. Cowing, which will be in bookstores in
early August 2004

Of course, the only comments from a Democratic presidential candidate
in 2004 that have come to have any real relevance to the future
progress of Bush's new space policy (should Bush lose) are those of
John Kerry, the Democratic Party's 2004 nominee. The day after Bush's
speech, the San Francisco Chronicle quoted Kerry as saying, "Rather
than sending Americans to Mars or the Moon right now, these people
would be better off trying to figure out how to get Americans back
from Iraq."

On 26 February 2004 the Cleveland Plain Dealer, reporting on Senator
and former Astronaut John Glenn's endorsement of John Kerry's
candidacy for president wrote: "In the afterglow of pioneering
astronaut John Glenn's endorsement, Sen. John Kerry said Wednesday
that he would fight to create new high-paying jobs in America with the
same vigor that President Kennedy demonstrated in launching the space
program in the 1960s ... But Kerry said the U.S. government should not
be talking about returning to the Moon or going to Mars -- missions
proposed by President Bush. Rather, he said, leaving his prepared
speech, 'We need to go to the Moon right here on Earth' by creating
high-paying jobs of the future and making sure that 'young Americans
in uniform are never held hostage' to Middle East oil.'"

In a written response to questions submitted by Space.com in June 2004
to Sen. Kerry's campaign, Kerry is quoted as saying, "NASA is an
invaluable asset to the American people and must receive adequate
resources to continue its important mission of exploration... However,
there is little to be gained from a 'Bush space initiative' that throws
out lofty goals, but fails to support those goals with realistic funding."

Space.com goes on to quote Kerry as saying, "The civil space program
acts as an engine of innovation for the entire country, making its
enormous benefits hard to quantify but even harder to discount... I'm
excited by potential advances in pharmaceuticals that microgravity
could lead to... Unique drug treatments produced in the microgravity
environment may play a vital role in reducing the cost of health care
and in developing defenses against chemical and biological terrorist
attacks."

Kerry has gone on the record favoring, at least as a general notion,
the possibility of raising NASA's budget. On the official Kerry
campaign website, a 28 August 2003 article titled 'John Kerry's Plan
to Fight for America's Economic Future' says: "Kerry will fight to
connect every American family to the Internet, encourage a renewed
educational focus on science and math, bring the best practices of
operational efficiency from the private sector to the public sector,
and restore the government's commitment to scientific achievement
through increases in research funding for the Department of Energy,
NASA, and the National Science Foundation." A trillion here, a
trillion there ...

However, with regard to the Bush space policy, it would seem that the
Kerry campaign was a little too eager to try and cast doubt on budget
numbers used by the Bush Administration -- and thus undermine the
credibility of whatever Bush proposed to do in space.

In a 5 April 2004 official press release titled 'New Report Reveals $6
Trillion in Hidden Spending in Bush Budget', the Kerry campaign says,
"The True Cost of the Mars Mission ($160 billion to $1 trillion):
President Bush has only included $1 billion in increased NASA funding
to fulfill his ambitious plan to establish a lunar base and land
people on Mars. Independent estimates of the cost of the Mars mission
range from $160 billion to $1 trillion.[3]" The $1 trillion reference
is listed as "[3] The $160 billion estimate is from Congressional
Testimony by Michael Griffin, former Chief Engineer of NASA on
3/10/04. The $1 trillion estimate is from Gregg Easterbrook, 'Red
Scare,' The New Republic, 2/2/04."

In Gregg Easterbrook's 2 February 2004 article 'Red Scare,' cited as a
source for a mission cost estimate by the Kerry campaign, you can see
that Easterbrook uses only conjectural semantics -- and not any actual
costs, specific designs, or mission architectures, to imagine that the
cost of a single mission to Mars would be $1 trillion. How Easterbrook
arrived at the number is simply not revealed. By the tone of
Easterbrook's article, it is clear that he does not like the Bush
space policy. As such, he made up some sticker-shock to help him make
his case.

The interesting thing about this $1 trillion figure is that you can
never trace it to a factual cost analysis. Instead it is a large round
number that is used to scare people -- or when reporters haven't done
their homework. It goes around like a virus too. In January 2004,
former Associated Press reporter Paul Recer included it in an article
he wrote, but could never identify its source.

Former Columbia Accident Investigation Board panel member Douglas
Osheroff made a similar unsubstantiated comment in another Associated
Press article by reporter Ted Bridis on 14 June 2004 where he is
quoted saying, "Never let it be said that NASA tends to overestimate
the cost of its missions," said Douglas Osheroff, a widely renowned
physicist who investigated the Columbia accident. "The cost in
present-day dollars ...  I think it's going to be one trillion."
Osheroff 'thinks' it will cost a trillion dollars. Bridis also makes
reference to the $1 trillion figure -- but never apparently sought to
confirm it for himself or ask Osheroff what his source was. A few days
after this article appeared Osheroff was one of 48 Nobel laureates who
formally endorsed John Kerry.

The net result of this urban myth is that everyone seems to think that
a cost estimation was made -- by someone, somewhere -- that said the
new Bush space policy was going to cost $1 trillion when in fact no
such estimate has ever actually been derived.

*Kerry's past record on space*

Space, as a campaign issue, has been, at best, a blip on the political
radar screens of national campaigns. Whether it will become an issue
in the 2004 race is unclear, but doubtful. While Kerry has spoken
little about space during the 2004 race, he has taken a very public
stand during his career in the Senate. It is from his previous
statements that one can get an idea of where he once stood, and likely
still stands vis-?-vis space. Should Kerry win the election, it would
be logical to expect that his stance on space as president would at
least use previous statements as a departure point.

Perhaps the clearest insight into John Kerry's view on human
spaceflight can be seen in his floor statements from the Congressional
Record. One 1996 floor statement in regard to HR 3666 and an attempt
to cancel funding for the International Space Station is particularly
illustrative. Curiously, while Kerry expressed excitement for the
prospect that drugs could be created in microgravity (one of the
things ISS was supposed to do) in June 2004, a decade earlier, Kerry
justified canceling the ISS in favor of a stronger focus on fighting
disease:

     /

     SPACE STATION FUNDING (Senate - September 04, 1996)

     Mr. KERRY. Mr. President, I join with the distinguished Senator from
     Arkansas as a cosponsor of his amendment and urge my colleagues to
     support this effort to terminate funding for the National
     Aeronautics and Space Administration Space Station program, which
     the General Accounting Office estimates will cost American taxpayers
     $94 billion.

     Every day, the working families of Massachusetts have to make tough
     choices about what they can afford, how to pay the rent, and whether
     they can send their kids to college.

     The Federal budget deficit, while reduced by two-thirds due to
     President Clinton's leadership and the courage of the
     Democratic-controlled Congress in 1993, is still too high and must
     be eliminated. It is a drain on our economy and, increasingly, the
     debt service we pay is robbing us of the ability to make badly
     needed investments in our future. I have been working in the U.S.
     Senate to make the tough choices necessary to balance the budget.

     When measured against this imperative, I believe the space station's
     potential benefits -- which I recognize -- do not stand the test. I
     believe we must terminate funding for this program. We cannot spend
     nearly $100 billion of the taxpayers money to fund the space station
     and then say that we do not have enough money to put cops on the
     beat, clean our environment, and ensure that our children get the
     best education possible.

     The Senator from Arkansas, joined by several others of us, has made
     a valiant effort to halt this project again and again over the past
     several years. I am hopeful that this year the time has come when
     the Senate will exercise fiscal responsibility over our Federal
     budget, like any family in Massachusetts would over its own family
     budget, by terminating the space station immediately in order to
     reduce the deficit.

     In 1984, NASA justified the space station based on eight potential
     uses. Now only one of these assignments remains: the space station
     will be used as a research laboratory. However, the costs of
     performing scientific research in space simply outweigh the
     potential benefits. It will cost over $12,000 to ship 1 pound of
     payload to the space station.

     Many of my colleagues support the space station because it creates
     jobs. But the project's costs for developing jobs are
     exorbitant -- those jobs will cost approximately $161,000 each. If
     invested here on terra firma, that amount of money would fund three
     or four or even more jobs.

     As a member of the Senate Commerce Committee, I have fought, along
     with the distinguished Senator from South Carolina [Mr. Hollings ]
     and other Senators, to secure funding for many important scientific
     programs. Many of these programs have been shortchanged in order to
     help pay for the costs associated with the development of the space
     station. Allowing this extraordinary large science program to
     receive funding at the expense of these other so-called small
     science programs -- which I believe will produce more products and more
     valuable products -- is unacceptable. These small programs are creating
     thousands of high wage technology jobs at a fraction of the cost
     associated with the space station.

     In the space program itself, the enormous level of funding consumed
     by the space station is crowding out much smaller programs for
     satellites and unmanned space probes, which most experts consider
     more cost-effective than manned missions.

     These activities are aimed at expanding our understanding of the
     Sun, the solar system, and the universe beyond. The specific
     programs in this category include the 'new millennium,' a program to
     build robotic spacecraft one-tenth the size and cost of satellites;
     the Cassini mission to Saturn, scheduled for launch in 1997;
     continuation of the Discovery missions, each of which costs less
     than $150 million, can be launched within 3 years of the start of
     its development, and is used by NASA to find ways to develop
     smaller, cheaper, faster, better planetary spacecraft; and the Mars
     surveyor program which funds a series of small missions to resume
     the detailed exploration of Mars after the loss of the Mars Observer
     mission in 1993.

     Funding for projects in this area will be approximately $1.86
     billion in fiscal year 1997 which represents a 9-percent reduction
     from last year. The academic research establishment is concerned
     that the space station appears to be draining funds from these other
     space projects.

     Also included among the programs placed at risk by the space station
     is the mission to planet Earth, NASA's satellite program to explore
     global climate change by means of a series of Earth observing
     satellites launched over a 15-year period, beginning in 1998 -- a
     program endorsed by the National Academy of Sciences.

     Given the structure of congressional appropriations bills, the
     enormous funding for the space station has come not just at the
     expense of other space programs but at the expense of environmental
     research and other important activities that promise to improve the
     lives of our citizens and enhance our security more completely.

     Building the space station has become a joint effort between the
     United States and Russia. We all want to see continued progress in
     United States-Russian relations. However, we should be encouraging
     Russia to house and feed its own people, provide jobs, and above all
     care for its deteriorating nuclear power plants and dismantle its
     nuclear missiles and warheads. Asking Russia to commit its resources
     to pursue an uncertain and risky space station venture instead of
     encouraging it to tend to these important matters is unwise.

     Some may argue that we have lost our vision if we terminate the
     space station. But their concern is misplaced. We still have vision.
     But the vision is to restore the American dream to our citizens, to
     restore their sense of safety on the streets, to invest in
     technology that will increase our competitiveness and the quality of
     jobs, to invest in research that will cure our deadly diseases, and
     to restore our communities to the condition where children can learn
     and dream. It is time to decide. I think the American people are
     watching impatiently to see whether the U.S. Congress can deliver
     spending reductions for programs that are politically popular but
     fiscally unwise.

     I commend my distinguished colleague from Arkansas, Senator Bumpers,
     for his continuing leadership on this important issue. I urge all my
     colleagues to vote to terminate the space station."

     /

Kerry expressed similar sentiments in regard to the FY 1994 VA HUD
Appropriations Act on September 21, 1994:

     /

     "We have libraries and schools in the United States of America that
     are shut in the afternoon and kids have nowhere to go. We have whole
     cities that are deprived of Boys and Girls Clubs so only 10 percent
     of the population has a place to find an outlet. But we can find
     money to put a few astronauts up in space at this moment in time?

     I would love to do that. I was raised on the promise of President
     Kennedy. Someone here asked earlier, 'Don't we have people of vision
     anymore?' Yes, Mr. President, we do. But the vision is to restore
     the American dream to our citizens, to restore their sense of safety
     on the streets, to invest in technology that will increase our
     competitiveness and the quality of jobs, to invest in the research
     that will cure our deadly diseases, and to restore our communities
     to the condition where children can learn and dream.

     Will terminating this program hurt in California? Will it hurt in
     Texas? Will the loss of $600,000 hurt in Massachusetts? Yes, it will
     hurt. But if we measure that loss against the pain that people
     across the country are feeling because we are not willing to address
     our fundamental needs as a Nation.

     It is hard choice time. That is what this is about, and I think the
     American people are waiting feverishly to see whether the United
     States Congress can actually do something for once -- whether we can
     really deliver some spending reductions and make some of the choices
     we ought to make for our future.

     Mr. President, I hope we will finally ante up and deliver to the
     American people. I had a separate bill to try to cut the space
     station and a number of other wasteful Federal programs. I am
     delighted to join the Senator from Arkansas and the Senator from
     Tennessee and others who are leading in this effort to try to help
     the Congress do the responsible thing. I hope we will succeed."

     /

John Kerry has a generally supportive view of NASA -- as long as he doesn't
have to get nailed down to specifics. This is not to say that he would
not support the agency overall -- indeed he has indicated that he would.
But when it comes to the International Space Station, his voting record
speaks resoundingly clearly:

     * In 1991, Kerry Voted To "Reduce Funding For The Space Station From
       $2 Billion To $100 Million," And Transfer Funds To Other Programs.
       (H.R. 2519, Congressional Quarterly Vote #132: Rejected 35-64: R
       3-40; D 32-24, July 17, 1991, Kerry Voted Yea)

     * In 1992, Kerry Voted To Terminate Space Station "Freedom" Project.
       (H.R. 5679, Congressional Quarterly Vote #194: Rejected 34-63: R
       4-39; D 30-24, September 9, 1992, Kerry Voted Yea)

     * In 1993, Kerry Voted "To Terminate The Space Station Program."
       (H.R. 2491, Congressional Quarterly Vote #272: Motion Agreed To
       59-40: R 36-8; D 23-32, September 21, 1993, Kerry Voted Nay)

     * In 1993, Kerry Voted To Terminate Space Station Program And Divert
       Funds To Tax Cuts. (H.R. 3167, Congressional Quarterly Vote #335:
       Motion rejected 36-61: R 10-32; D 26-29, October 27, 1993, Kerry
       Voted Yea)

     * In 1994, Kerry Voted To Cut $1.9 Billion From Space Station
       Program, Thus Terminating It. (H.R. 4624, Congressional Quarterly
       Vote #253: Rejected 36-64: R 6-38; D 30-26, August 3, 1994, Kerry
       Voted Yea)

     * In 1995, Kerry Voted To Reduce NASA Funding By $400 Million. (H.R.
       889, Congressional Quarterly Vote #105: Motion Agreed To 64-35: R
       43-11; D 21-24, March 16, 1995, Kerry Voted Nay)

     * In 1995, Kerry Voted To Cut $1.8 Billion From NASA's Human Space
       Flight Program. (H.R. 2099, Congressional Quarterly Vote #463:
       Motion Rejected 35-64: R 12-41; D 23-23, September 26, 1995, Kerry
       Voted Yea)

     * In 1996, Kerry Voted To Cut $1.6 Billion From NASA's Human Space
       Flight Program And Terminate Space Station Program. (H.R. 3666,
       Congressional Quarterly Vote #267: Motion Agreed To 61-36: R
       38-12; D 23-24, September 4, 1996, Kerry Voted Nay)

Given this rather blunt rejection of human space flight and a
permanent human presence in space, one has to wonder: if Kerry is this
strongly against the International Space Station, a multi-year,
multi-billion dollar international program several hundred miles
overhead, whether he'd be any more interested in a similarly large,
long-term project that sent humans to the Moon or Mars.

Then again, people have been known to change. Nixon went to China.

Copyright ? 1999-2004 SpaceRef Interactive Inc. All rights reserve d.
